Improvement of Segmentation Quality of Multispectral Images by Increasing Resolution(/section)Andrii Hryvachevskyi, Ivan Prudyus, Leonid Lazko, Sergiy Fabirovskyy(/section)2016 17th International Conference Computational Problems of Electrical Engineering (CPEE)(/section)The paper considers increasing of the multispectral images resolution using arithmetic combinations based on the Brovey transform method to improve segmentation of multispectral images by k-means clustering algorithm.(/section)segmentation, cluster analysis, k-means algorithm, Brovey transform, multispectral monitoring(/section)I. INTRODUCTIONto the arithmetic mean value (expectation) of observations relating to a given cluster. As a measure of affinity, for example, elements (or dots) u and v, Euclidean distance is used [6]:Modern remote sensing systems allows us to monitor the Earth's surface in several spectral bands in real-time [1]. Typically, such systems have four multispectral channels (blue,green, red and near-IR) to construct the color image and one panchromatic channel, which forms an image in the form of radiation intensity values in a whole optical range, rather thanin a separate channel. Such systems are the following: IKONOS-2, QuickBird-2, KOMPSAT-2, GeoEye-1, WorldView-1 and many others [1, 2]. For example, artificialEarth satellite QuickBird DigitalGlobe company carries out survey in five spectral bands with a resolution of 0,61 m in panchromatic mode and 2,44 m in multispectral, and the size ofthe scene, which is scanned in one shot – 16,5x16,5 km. The amount of data obtained in this way is very high, therefore to simplify the presentation and to facilitate analysis of i multispectral image segmentation is necessary to implementII. CLUSTERINGALGORITHM  kmin x  2   n2ndu,v u v   u,vE     where du,v – the distance between points u and v in three- pp dimensionalEuclideanspace En, p1,,n, n3.p1In our case, the studied data set is the set of points ofmultispectral images.We consider the plurality of observations (pixels)x1,x2,,xm,where xj En.Algorithmofk-meansmethodbreaks m observations on the k groups (or clusters) S  S1 , S2 ,, Sk , so as to minimize the total deviation ofthe elements of clusters xj from centroids of these clusters :Segmentation – it is process of separating the digital image separation into disjoint areas on the basis of homogeneity (similarity) of their spectral or spatial (texture, size, shape, context) characteristics.ji i1 xjSi         The most effective approach to segmentation of multispectral images of the monitoring is based on the use of data clustering algorithms [3, 4].arithmetic mean of observations x j  Si ).One of the most common methods of clustering is algorithm of k-means [3, 5, 6]. Its implementation included in virtually all software packages designed for the analysis of space images.If the measure of proximity to the centroid is determined (see the expression (1)), the partition elements into clusters is reduced to the determination of the centroids of the clusters.The aim of the method of k-means is separation of research data set, which consists of m-observations on k- clusters. Each observation refers to the cluster, centroid of which is closest one. Under the centroid, in this case, we refer In the first stage of the algorithm, centroid clusters are selected randomly or according to some rule (for example, selected centroid, which maximize the initial distance between clusters).978-1-5090-2800-9/16/$31.00 ⃝c 2016 IEEEwhere k – the number of clusters; Si – obtained clusters; i1,2,,k; j1,2,,m; i – cluster centroid Si (theWe consider the initial set of k-means (centroids) 1,2 ,,k in clusters S1,S2,,Sk . In this case, each observation x j from a given set refers to a cluster, the averagebetween the test and the synthesized multispectral images SSIM.value of which is close to this observation. Thus a first set of decision boundaries is formed. In the next step the centroid of each i-th cluster is recalculated according to the rule:TABLE I.Brovey transform is based on spectral modeling. This conversion uses a method in which a luminance value of each pixel multispectral image is multiplied by the ratio of the brightness of the corresponding pixel of panchromatic image to the sum of the brightness of all multispectral image channels [8]:R  R'(RGBN)P,   ERRORS OF METHODSErrorMultispectral image with low resolution Int ensity-Hue-S a tu rat i on (IH S)   transformationBrovey transform NMSE, %43,45  20,63 20,36SSIM0,5018 0,9761 0,9793 1  i  S x    Method (image) i xjSij  Thus, the average k-algorithm is based on the centroid of each iteration for each cluster obtained in the previous iteration. As a result, at each iteration k-averages will follow the direction of data clusters within their intended field currently feature space.The iterations will continue as long as the value iwillnot change in two successive iterations. The criteria for completing iterative process is recorded by the following expression:   it  it1    where t – iteration number.             Algorithm of k-means clustering is easy to implement and allows you to perform a segmentation of multispectral images quickly using only one configuration parameter – the number of k clusters.  G'  B' G P,    (R  G  B  N )B P    (R  G  B  N ) The work [3] shows that the quality of the segmentation of multispectral images depends on their resolution. Obviously, by increasing the resolution of multispectral images, we can improve their quality of segmentation.Nwhere R, G, B, N – are mentioned intensities of spectral III. IMPROVEMENT OF MULTISPECTRAL IMAGE RESOLUTION  N'(RGBN)P   There are many methods developed to increase the resolution of multispectral color images by panchromatic channel, such as [7, 8]:''''channels with low resolution; R , G , B , N – mentioned method of direct image synthesis;intensities of spectral channels of formed multispectral image with high resolution; P – is a value of intensity of pixels of panchromatic image [7, 9]. weighted averaging method;For this method multispectral high-resolution images are formed on the following algorithm: Intensity-Hue-Saturation (IHS) transformation; Increase of multispectral images to fit the panchromatic image using interpolation procedure. Principal Component Analysis (PCA); method of arithmetic combinations based on Brovey transform; Calculate of pixel intensity multispectral image with high resolution using (5-8). Gram-Schmidt transformation;It is assumed that the spectral range of the panchromatic image corresponds to the spectral range of multispectral images. Multispectral image in this case consists of four spectral channels: blue (B), green (G), red (R) and near infrared (N). method based on wavelet transforms.In [7, 8] it is analyzed the performance of algorithms and image quality generated by this means. The best results were showed by method of arithmetic combinations based on the Brovey transform [8]. Therefore, this method is chosen for further studies.In Table 1 shows the mean square error of imaging resolution temple NMSE and the correlation coefficient       
Proceedings of CPEE 2016September 14-17th 2016, Sandomierz, Poland IV. SIMULATION RESULTSApplying the method of arithmetic combinations based on Brovey transform, increasing the resolution of multispectral images from 2.44 m to 0.61 m is implemented due to the panchromatic channel (Fig. 3).Fig. 3. Test images images (2000x2000 pixels) increased to 0.61 m resolutionTo improve the visual perception of the image it is necessary to increase its contrast. This can be done by linear contrast stretching, which takes place after reduction (improvement) of the image (Fig. 4).Fig. 4. Test images with high image to 0,61 m resolution and improved by a linear contrast stretchingSatellite images QuickBird were used to demonstrate the results of the algorithm segmentation of multispectral image data by clustering k-means.Fig. 1. Test image (500x500 pixels) with a resolution of 2.44 mTo test the color image formed with a resolution of 2.6 m is used k-means clustering algorithm to obtain the resulting segmented image (Fig. 2).Fig. 2. The result of the segmentation test image with a resolution of 2.44 mAs the test image color composite picture is used, generated from the near-infrared (N), red (R) and green (G) spectral channels with resolution of 2.44 m (Fig. 1).      
Proceedings of CPEE 2016September 14-17th 2016, Sandomierz, Poland For the improvement of investigated multispectral image with high resolution clustering algorithm of k-means is used. As a result, the image is divided (segmented) on k  5 clusters (Fig. 5).Fig. 5. The result of the test image segmentation of k-means methodquality of the segmentation of multispectral images clustering algorithm k-means in comparison with the result segmentation without such pretreatment. V. CONCLUSION Pretreatment multispectral color images, namely the application of the method of arithmetic combinations based on the conversion eyebrows to enhance the resolution of multispectral images by the panchromatic channel, and the application of the linear stretch image contrast, improves the
(/section)http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=7738750(/section)@INPROCEEDINGS{7738750, 
author={A. Hryvachevskyi and I. Prudyus and L. Lazko and S. Fabirovskyy}, 
booktitle={2016 17th International Conference Computational Problems of Electrical Engineering (CPEE)}, 
title={Improvement of segmentation quality of multispectral images by increasing resolution}, 
year={2016}, 
pages={1-4}, 
keywords={image resolution;image segmentation;pattern clustering;transforms;Brovey transform method;arithmetic combination;k-means clustering algorithm;multispectral image resolution;multispectral image segmentation quality improvement;Brovey transform;cluster analysis;k-means algorithm;multispectral monitoring;segmentation}, 
doi={10.1109/CPEE.2016.7738750}, 
month={Sept},}