(title)The Design of Microwave Planar Power Dividers and Couplers with Distinct Power Division Ratio in Two Different Frequency Bands(/title)
(authors)Valeriy Oborzhytskyy, Ivan Prudyus(/authors)
(conference)2016 International Conference Radio Electronics & Info Communications (UkrMiCo)(/conference)
(abstract)This paper presents the application of equivalent replacement method for the development of dual-band microwave power distribution devices with arbitrary power division ratio in different frequency bands. The expressions allowing to replace with the equivalent circuits of T-type and P-type a transmission line segment having a different values of characteristic impedance and electrical length at different frequencies are received. For the obtaining of such expressions the method based on the input reactances of reduced partial circuits of even-mode and odd-mode excitation is offered for using. Expression for determination of parameters of the loaded line segment which is used for realization of a reactance with two values of resistance at different frequencies is received also. The examples of calculation and simulation of a dual-frequency power divider and rat- race coupler with power division ratio equal to 2 and 1 at frequencies 2 and 3.6 GHz are given.(/abstract)
(content)I. INTRODUCTIONPerspective direction of development of the modern radio engineering systems and first of all telecommunication systems consists in simultaneous use of several frequency bands according to available standards. During realization of such systems there are problems, related to considerable complication of structure, with growth of overall sizes and cost. The way of their decision consists in application of dual band microwave devices, which provides the set values of operating parameters on central frequencies of two different frequency bands. Much attention is paid at that to design of passive devices of microwave integrated circuits. Relatively narrow frequency bands of telecommunication standards allow to go out from the values of central frequencies fi (i=1, 2) of these bands at the calculations of passive devices and to consider their as the dual-frequency devices. The frequency coefficient which is determined through the relation of frequencies kf=f2/f1 (f2>f1 as a rule) is one of basic parameters of such device. Microwave devices of a signal distribution such as power dividers, directional couplers and hybrids, belong to the most important components of high-frequency networks. In the majority of famous publications the design methods of such devices with identical working parameters in each of frequency bands are considered. It concerns, for example, the equal [1] and unequal [2, 3, 4] dual-band power dividers, branch-line couplers [5, 6], ring hybrids [5]. The miscellaneous division of power in bands is considered only for different versions of two-branch couplers [7 – 9] and for one option of the rat-race coupler [8]. Therefore it is very important to solve the task of a different distribution of power in different bands of frequencies.Realization of dual-frequency devices foresees the use of circuit elements which are dependent upon frequency. Due to the change of electrical parameters of them at transition from the first frequency f1 to the second f2 the necessary operating parameters of device are arrived at. One of approaches to development of dual-frequency devices is based on the use of method of equivalent replacement. By this method the circuit of the similar single-frequency device is chosen and stage-by- stage replacement of its elements dependent upon frequency (basic elements) by new dual-frequency elements is carried out. These elements provide the same parameters, as the basic elements, but only at two frequencies. Such approach is used for power dividers and also for branch-line and rat-race couplers where each quarter wave segment of line is replaced by equivalent segment of the connected lines [3] or by equivalent T-network formed by segment of line with stub in centre [4, 5]. The P-network formed by segment of the line with stubs at the edges is used in [8, 9] for a two-branch-line coupler in process of the equivalent replacement of its basic segments with different values of characteristic impedance for different frequencies, but with identical electrical length, equal only to 900, what creates the restrictions at the design of dual- band devices with arbitrary power division ratios.In work the approach allowing to develop the methods of calculation of various symmetric circuits for the equivalent replacement of a segment of line with different characteristic impedances and different electrical lengths for two different frequencies is offered, the using of which it is shown on the examples of T- and P-network. Such circuits are necessary for design of dual-band devices with arbitrary division of power in different frequency bands. II. DEVELOPMENT OF EQUIVALENT DUAL-FREQUENCY CIRCUITSFor effective use of equivalent replacement method it is necessary to have a number of various variants of circuits together with calculation formulas.A. PrincipleofbasicsegmentreplacementwiththecircuitThe deduce of expressions for calculation of equivalent circuit is considerably simplified, if it is a reactive symmetric two-port network, what allows to use the method of input impedances of reduced partial circuits received by even-odd excitation [10]. In this case, unlike a well-known approach with equating of matrixes elements (conductivities or resistances) of the basic segment and equivalent circuit, the equating of corresponding input impedances is required. At such equivalent replacement the expressions for input reactances Xe1, Xo1 of partial circuits of even-odd excitation of equivalent circuit at the first operating frequency f1 are equated with the expressions for input reactances Xte1, Xto1 of partial circuits of even-odd excitation of basic segment at this frequency, and the expressions for input reactances Xe2, Xo2 at the second operating frequency f2 are equated with expressions for input reactances Xte2, Xto2, which correspond to frequency f2. Farther the expressions for calculation of two values of electrical parameters of elements of equivalent circuit for frequencies f1 and f2 via parameters of basic segment are deduced from these equalities.B. CircuitsforreplacementoftransmissionlinesegmentBy a basic element depending from frequency in the structure of unequal microstrip devices for distributing of power there is transmission line segment, the values of characteristic impedance and electrical length of which depend on the power division ratio. Each such basic segment is the symmetrical two-port network with different values of characteristic impedance Zti and of electrical length  ti at two frequencies fi (i=1, 2). Its partial circuits of even-mode and odd-mode decomposition are formed by open and short halves of segment. The input reactances of these partial circuits can be obtained as follows:Xtei=-Zti/tti, Xtoi=Ztitti, (1) were t =tan(  /2). The same input reactances have to be provided at partial components of the equivalent circuit.Equivalent T-type circuit consists of two transmission line segments with the electrical length  i at frequencies fi and with characteristic impedance Z and also of shunt reactance Xi, included between lines. In this case the expressions for input reactances of partial circuits of even-mode and odd-mode excitations write down as Xei = Z(2Xi +Zti )/(Z −2Xiti ),X oi = Zt i , were ti=tan( i). From equating these expressions to expressions (1) the final design equations were derived:Xi = Z(Zti + Ztitti )/[2(Ztiti − Ztti )], A=tan(θ )/tan(θ )=tan(θ )/tan(k θ ),(2) (3)121f1were A = Z t /(Z t ), k – the frequency coefficient. t1 t1 t2 t2 f Here it is accepted that  2=kf 1 from condition that kf=f2/f1  2/ 1 where  i are phase constants of line at frequencies fi. The value of  1 may be found from (3) by iterative calculations.Equivalent P-type circuit consists of transmission line segment with the electrical length  i at frequencies fi and with characteristic impedance Z and also of two shunt reactances Xi which are included to the edges of line. Expressions for input reactances of partial circuits of even-odd excitations write down as Xei =XiZ/(Z−Xiti), Xoi =XiZti /(Xi +Zti),were ti =tan( i/2). The equating of these expressions to expressions (1) gives two expressions for Xi:Xi =ZZti /(Ztiti −Ztti), Xi =ZZtititti /(Zti −Ztitti). (4) And the equating of expressions for Xi gives the formula for Z: Z=Zti sin(θti)/sin(θi). (5)The equating at different values of index i of formulas (5) gives the equality:A = s i n (θ 1 ) / s i n (θ 2 ) = s i n (θ 1 ) / s i n ( k f θ 1 ) ,were A=Zt1sin(θt1)/[Zt2sin(θt2)]. As in previous case thevalue of  1 may be found from (6) by iterative calculations.Dual-frequency reactance accepting different values Xi at different frequencies fi enter (one or several) to each of equivalent circuits given above. Such elements may be realized by circuit the input reactance of which is equal to Xi values. This circuit most often is formed by discrete elements, a transmission line stub or connection of line's segments. The electrical parameters depending from frequency are necessary in circuit to provide the different values of input reactance at the changing of frequency. When the line stub (characteristic impedance Zs, electrical length  si) loaded by the Xki reactance is used, its electrical length  s1 may be found from the equality: tanθ (X −X )(Z +X X ) s1 = 1 k1 s 2 k2 , (7) tan(kfθs1) (X2 −Xk2)(Zs +X1Xk1) where value Zs is chosen so that to satisfy simultaneously the equality tanθ =Z (X −X )/(Z2 +X X ). When Xki=0 s1 s 1 k1 s 1 k1 (the shorted end of stub) then Zs=X1/tan( s1) and when Xki=  (the open end of stub) then Zs=-X1tan( s1). When the combinations of values X1, X2 give negative value of Zs the stepped impedance section can be used, where the load Xki is the input reactance of second segment of line.III. PROCEDURE OF EQUIVALENT REPLACEMENT AND EXAMPLES OF ITS USINGProcess of design of a microstrip device by a method of equivalent replacement is carried out in such sequence. 1) The known version of the single-frequency circuit of power distribution device similar to the required device is chosen. 2) Based from preset values of division power ratios ki at frequencies fi the parameters Zti,  ti of all basic line segments in composition of chosen circuit are calculated for both fi by using known methods of single-frequency circuit calculation. 3) The electrical parameters of elements of the chosen equivalent circuit for every basic segment are calculated: the value  1 is found by iteration method from (3) or (6) and after that the values Z and Xi are calculated from (2) or (4) and (5). -10 4) For the chosen variant of load with reactance Xki the segment parameters providing the input reactance Xi are found from (7).The dependences of scattering parameters of symmetrical circuit from the input impedances of its partial components are -30 shown [11], that the change of sign of reactive components of input impedances leads to change of the phase's signs of scattering parameters, but their modules do not change and the distributing of power between outputs of circuit remains the same. Therefore, if to change a sign of  ti at one of frequencies, it causes the change of signs Xtei, Xtoi and leads to other variant of the electrical parameters of equivalent circuit's elements, at which preset operating parameters of device will be provided. The design of unequal Wilkinson power divider and of rat- race ring coupler is considered as the examples of using the offered method. Different values of power division ratios ki=2.0/1.0 at average frequencies fi=2.0/3.6 GHz of two bands were preset for these devices. The equivalent replacement by P-type circuits was carried out for power divider. In case of rat-race coupler the equivalent replacement by T-type circuits with change of  t2 sign, that is  t2=- /2, was used. Fig. 1 shows the scattering parameters received at the power divider simulation. The results of dual-frequency rat-race coupler simulation are shown in Fig. 2. It is visible that the change of a sign  t2 changes on opposite a sign of output signal phase at f2, but division of power corresponds to set. Characteristics of basic single-frequency devices calculated for k1=2.0 at first frequency f1 are shown by dotted line in Figures. Fig. 1. Scattering parameters of power divider. IV. CONCLUSION The received expressions allow to design the dual-band devices with an arbitrary distribution of power in frequency bands. The expressions for other variants of dual-frequency equivalent two-pole circuit which are necessary for replacement of line segment with different values of electrical parameters at two frequencies can be written down by offered way. Fig. 2. Scattering parameters of rat-race coupler.
(link)http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7739593(/link)
(bibtex)@INPROCEEDINGS{7739593, 
author={V. Oborzhytskyy and I. Prudyus}, 
booktitle={2016 International Conference Radio Electronics Info Communications (UkrMiCo)}, 
title={The design of microwave planar power dividers and couplers with distinct power division ratio in two different frequency bands}, 
year={2016}, 
pages={1-3}, 
keywords={microwave devices;power dividers;waveguide couplers;characteristic impedance;dual band microwave power distribution devices;equivalent replacement method;even-mode excitation;frequency 2 GHz;frequency 3.6 GHz;microwave couplers;microwave planar power divider design;odd-mode excitation;power division ratio;reduced partial circuits;transmission line segment;Couplers;Dual band;Frequency conversion;Microwave circuits;Microwave integrated circuits;Power dividers;dual band;equivalent replacement method;microstrip divider;rat-race coupler;unequal division of power}, 
doi={10.1109/UkrMiCo.2016.7739593}, 
month={Sept},}(/bibtex)