High-Frequency Class-E Power Amplifier with Shunt Filter(/section)D. G. Makarov, Ju. V. Rassokhina, V. G. Krizhanovski, Grebennikov Andrei(/section)2016 International Conference Radio Electronics & Info Communications (UkrMiCo)(/section)In this paper, an experimental investigation of high-frequency Class-E power amplifier with shunt filter is presented. Using of a shunt LC filter in the load network instead of a series LC tank used in conventional Class-E power amplifier allows the maximum operating frequency and second-harmonic suppression level to be increased compared to conventional Class-E power amplifier. The parasitic resistive elements of the load network were taken into account in simulation of Class-E power amplifier with shunt filter and contribution of each parasitic resistive element has been simulated and calculated.(/section)I. INTRODUCTIONModern wireless communication systems require high operation efficiency and high harmonic suppression level resulting in lower power consumption, size and cost. This can be achieved by using switching-mode Class-E [1] or Class-F [2] power amplifiers (PAs). The single-ended switching-mode power amplifier with a shunt capacitor was introduced and described in details as a Class-E power amplifier in mid-70s and has found widespread application due to its design simplicity and high operation efficiency [1, 3]. There are different configurations of Class-E PA: conventional Class E with shunt capacitance, Class E with finite dc-feed inductance, or Class-E with quarterwave transmission line [4]. Besides, there are many implementations of broadband Class-E PA using reactance-compensation or filtering techniques [5, 6]. All types of Class-E PA are based on common optimum switching conditions regardless of their schematic realization: drain voltage and drain voltage derivative become zero prior to the moment of switch "ON". Thus, there is no power dissipation in the switch and efficiency ideally reaches 100%.Each type of Class-E PA consists of the active device operating as a switch and the load network that can be designed in different configurations. In this paper, an experimental investigation of high-frequency Class-E PA with shunt filter and lumped-element load network is presented. Actually, the first results for switching-mode Class-E PA with shunt filter were demonstrated in the late 60-s for particular case and based on vacuum tube as an active device [7]. Much more detailed approaches to design Class-E power amplifier with shunt filter including transmission-line implementation and broadband capability within frequency band from 1.7 to 2.7 GHz achieving the output power of about 40.6 dBm and average drain efficiency of 68% were described in [8]. But generally there is a lack of practical implementations of the lumped-element load-networks for Class-E PA with shunt filter.Thus, the objective of this work is to experimentally test Class-E PA with shunt filter at high frequency with lumped- element load network and to determine main sources of power loss and their contribution to overall efficiency.II. CIRCUIT ANALYSISThe circuit schematic of a Class-E PA with shunt filter is shown in Fig. 1. It consists of the switching power MOSFET device VT1, RF choke (Lchoke) that allows only dc current to flow through dc voltage source, shunt capacitance C, series inductance L, dc-blocking capacitor Cb, which is assumed to have relatively high capacitance to present very low impedance at operating frequency, shunt L0C0 filter, series reactance X, and load resistance Rload [8].Series reactance X can be negative – capacitance, equal to zero, or positive – inductance, and also can represent some type of parasitic elements of load-network real components. The shunt L0C0 filter is tuned to the fundamental frequency having infinite impedance at this frequency and zero- impedance at harmonics. As in conventional Class-E power amplifier, the shunt capacitance C consists of internal drain- source capacitance of active device and external capacitance.In theoretical analysis, it is assumed that- the transistor has zero saturation voltage, zero saturation resistance, infinite off-resistance, and its switching is instantaneous and lossless- the series reactance X = 0- the shunt capacitance is assumed to be constant- the shunt L0C0 filter has zero impedance at harmonics - there is no loss in the circuit except the load Rload- 50% duty ratio is used. Fig. 1.As a result of the theoretical analysis, the following design equations for the load-network parameters are obtained:V2 Rload   0.4281 dc Pout L R   1.4836  CR   0.261L0   R   Q where Q is the quality factor of shunt L0C0 filter and     2 f isthe radian operating frequency [8]. In this case, the optimum switching Class-E conditions are satisfied at operating frequency, and the maximum amplitude of the drain voltage is 3.677 times of dc-supply voltage that is similar to that in conventional Class-E PA. Besides, for each active device with its intrinsic drain-source capacitance Cout, the maximum operating frequency is 1.91 times greater than that for conventional Class-E PA and can be obtained by [8]f   0.097 Pmax outC V2The initial operation conditions are as follow: operating frequency of 13.56 MHz, dc-supply voltage of 12 V, output power of 5 W, and load-network quality factor Q = 5. An active device is power MOSFET IRF520 with its internal output capacitance of about 150 pF and the maximum allowable drain-source voltage of 100 V [9].4030201,00,50 . 1 5 u F   C 0   6,0 L0 LR 5,5Output power, WDrain voltage, VDrain current, ADrain efficiency, %Fig. 2.The values of the load-network elements calculatedaccording to the design equations are written as Rload = 12.3  , L=214.7nH,C=100pF,L0 =28.9nH,C0 =4760pF. The circuit schematic of the load network of Class-E PA with parasitic elements is shown in Fig. 2.Here, the parasitic resistances of inductor L and dc- blocking capacitor Cb are presented by Rseries. The parasitic resistances of the elements of shunt L0C0 filter are given by RL0 and RC0, and the parasitic inductance of the load resistor is shown by LR.III. SIMULATION OF AMPLIFIERSimulation of Class-E PA with shunt filter was fulfilled using ADS harmonic balance simulator with the switch model for active device having the on-state resistance of 0.15  . The simulated drain voltage and current waveforms at operating frequency are shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3. Drain voltage and current simulated waveforms.As can be seen, the drain voltage and drain voltage derivative are zero prior to the moment of switch "ON", thus demonstrating that the idealized optimum or nominal Class-E switching conditions are satisfied.The output power and drain efficiency versus frequency are shown in Fig. 4. As can be seen, the simulated output power is 4.96 W with 98.8% drain efficiency at operating frequency of 13.56 MHz. Fig. 4.Simulated output power and efficiency. IV. EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONFrom design equation for the series and shunt inductances it follows that their values in Class-E PA with shunt filter are much less than the corresponding values for conventional Class-E PA at the same operating frequency and they are equal to 214.7 nH and 28.9 nH, respectively. In this case, to make design more convenient in implementation and to minimize losses and parasitic elements shown in Fig. 2, special technical approaches were used in experimental prototype under its practical implementation. The experimentally obtained drain and load voltage waveforms are shown in Fig. 5. It can be seen that the drain voltage waveform corresponds to the nominal switching Class-E conditions. Fig. 5.Experimental drain and load voltage waveforms. In practical implementation, first the load resistor was made of 40 SMD resistors connected in parallel to minimize the series lead inductance. These resistors are attached to the small-size PCB on one side, while the mica capacitor C0 is connected to the load by wide conductors at the other side. Mica capacitor type is "KSO" and its ESR at operating frequency is not more than 0.07   [10]. The inductance L0 represents one turn of silver-coated wire and placed close to C0 between its leads to minimize additional inductances. Hence, the L0C0Rload filter is realized as a separate unit, as shown in Fig. 6, and its parameters can be adjusted individually. L0C0Rload filter construction. The capacitor C is connected directly to the drain of the power MOSFET and inductor L is connected to the same point. Similar to inductor L0 it is made from silver-coated wire as well. The output power and drain efficiency versus frequency are shown in Fig. 7. Fig. 7.11,512,012,513,0 Frequency, MHz14,014,5100 90 80 70 60 50 40 3015,0 15,513,5Experimentally obtained output power and efficiency versus frequency. At operating frequency of 13.56 MHz this Class-E PA delivers 3.33 W to the load with 92.5% drain efficiency. As can be seen, the measured output power is slightly less than expected from simulation, which means that the simulation using simplified nonlinear model of MOSFET IRF520 cannot properly describe the behavior of nonlinear capacitances [9].In addition, the parasitic resistances of shunt filter and inductance LR are included in PA simulation. Because the inductor L0 consists of one turn only, its parasitic resistance was not taken into account, and the parasitic resistance Rseries of inductor L is calculated to be 0.08  . As for parasitic inductance LR, it can be estimated to be equal to 20 nH due to technical features of experimental prototype. The simulation results of the output power and drain efficiency versus frequency are shown in Fig. 8. It can be seen that these dependencies remain almost the same although with slightly lower values. Fig. 8. Simulated output power and drain efficiency using MOSFET model and lossy elements. In this case, Class-E PA delivers 3.7 W of output power with 85% drain efficiency.Next step is to calculate loss contribution of each parasitic resistance RC0 and Rseries. The loss due to RL0 was not taken into account because of very low inductance L0, with estimation that resistance is lower than 0.01  . The dissipation power in each resistor was simulated by measuring rms current flowing through each resistor according toP RI2 diss diss RMSAs the result, the final values of the dissipation powers are as follow: PRC0 = 0.536 W and PRseries = 0.032 W. It can be seen that, to minimize power losses in Class-E PA with shunt filter, the capacitor C0 should have extremely low tg .Thus, it can be concluded that the series parasitic resistances of shunt L0C0 filter significantly decrease the output power and efficiency of Class-E PA with shunt filter and it becomes difficult to implement it at high frequencies using lumped-element load network. However, as an advantage, the simulation has shown 50 dB of second harmonic suppression at the load. Consequently, it could be useful to further investigate the lumped-element Class-E PA with shunt filter involving the parasitic reactive elements in its schematic.The next step is to investigate power amplifier behavior with nonzero reactance X shown at Fig. 1, which can be negative or positive and represent capacitive or inductive part of load impedance. This can be parasitic parameters of load or reactive load like antenna. Several capacitors and inductors were put in experimental prototype schematic and their values were chosen to obtain X impedance from 0 to 2R for inductors and from -2R to 0 for capacitances. Then output power and drain efficiency were measured at central frequency of 13.56 MHz versus X/R ratio. Also simulation of such dependences were obtained using ADS. These dependences are shown at Fig. 9.As can be seen experimentally obtained and simulated data have similar dependences, except simulated output power in capacitive X part. It can be explained with using of ideal switch and ideal passive elements models without resistive losses in simulation.Thus the range of reactance X in which there is none of significant amplifier characteristics decreasing is determined and it is approximately from -0.5R to 0.5R. So in the case of reactance X presence we have another one parameter that can be included in theoretical analysis of such scheme and can be deeply investigated.V. CONCLUSIONIn this paper, the high-frequency Class-E power amplifier with shunt filter was designed, simulated, and experimentally tested. Special design features were used to minimize the values of the parasitic resistive parameters of the lumped- element load network. Experimental prototype of Class-E PA with shunt filter demonstrated 3.33 W of output power with 92.5% drain efficiency at 13.56 MHz. It is shown in simulation that even relatively small values of the parasitic resistive elements significantly decrease the quality factor of shunt L0C0 filter and entire characteristics of PA. In this case, the main source of losses is the capacitor of the shunt L0C0 tank and it is very important to choose this capacitor with as lower tg  as possible. Experimental investigation with reactance X 0 was held and the range of X/R values in which characteristics of amplifier don’t decrease was determined. So further investigation can include effects of nonzero X in theoretical analysis of class-E power amplifier with shunt filter. Fig. 9.Simulated and measured output power and drain efficiency versus X/R ratio.(/section)http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=7739594(/section)@INPROCEEDINGS{7739594, author={D. G. Makarov and J. V. Rassokhina and V. G. Krizhanovski and G. Andrei}, booktitle={2016 International Conference Radio Electronics Info Communications (UkrMiCo)}, title={High-frequency Class-E power amplifier with shunt filter}, year={2016}, pages={1-4}, keywords={HF amplifiers;LC circuits;circuit simulation;radiofrequency filters;radiofrequency power amplifiers;high frequency Class-B power amplifier;parasitic resistive element;second-harmonic suppression level;shunt LC filter;Capacitance;Capacitors;Power amplifiers;Power generation;Power harmonic filters;Shunts (electrical);Switches;Class E;parasitic elements;power amplifier;shunt filter}, doi={10.1109/UkrMiCo.2016.7739594}, month={Sept},}